JAX-WS Handlers:

By the end of this section, you will have a handle on the JAX-WS handlers.


That is, you will learn what, why and when to use the JAX-WS handlers from this lecture and then you'll learn more about the lower level API and implement a

JAX-WS handler in easy steps in the next few lectures. As we create service oriented applications and develop several web service endpoints and Web services consumers or clients, once in a while we need to address some cross-cutting concerns or nonfunctional requirements which have to be applied across Web services clients or across the web services Endpoints. That is, these requirements might not have anything to do with the business logic, but they need us to manipulate the SOAP message.

It could be the SOAP headers, the SOAP body or it could be a completely different requirement which your application needs, but it is a nonfunctional requirement which should be applied across WS Endpoints.

That is where the handlers available in the JAX-WS standard come into picture.These handlers are classes that we develop by implementing certain interfaces in the JAX-WS API. And

Web services stacks like Apache CXF will call into these handlers when the client request is sent from the client, when the request comes into the endpoint and the response goes back from the endpoint and also when the response comes back on to the client.

These handlers are very similar to servlet filters, if you are aware of servlet filters, except for these handlers can be applied both on the client side as well as the server side.

Whatever logic we write in the methods in the handlers will be called by web services stacks like CXF.Let's discuss some scenarios so that you will learn why and when to use handlers. Handlers can be used to implement custom authentication mechanism.

Let's say you don't want to use the username token profile or whatever is available in the WS standard and you want to include your own SOAP headers,you can create handlers both on the provider side and the client side of your application and you can manipulate the SOAP headers inside the handlers.

All the soap message information will be available to you when you create a handler.The second usage I have seen in some applications long long back is Caching.

So instead of our Web service doing a particular service everytime, we can create a handler that will Cache the responses and it can check the request to see if it's the same request which came in earlier and then it can send back the response from the cache instead of calling into the web services endpoint and executing then entire business logic and database operations again. The third usage which is a little weird again, but you never know what your applications need.

I have seen this as well in one of the companies, wherein we had to maintain a legacy application which had different versions of the same exact web service in the same exact application.

So when the client sends in a request, we have to decide, we had to decide which particular web service will service that particular request based on the version that comes in the SOAP header.

So our handler was dispatching it to the particular endpoint.So all that can be done using JAX-WS handlers.

Sometimes we write the JAX-WS handlers and configure them only on the provider side and sometimes we do the client side and sometimes we do them on both sides. So depending on our application requirements, handlers can be written and configured for either the providers are the clients or both.

To summarize, from this lecture you have learnt that JAX-WS handlersgive you a custom way to manipulate the soap message or to address cross-cutting concerns like security caching which your application needs or the various endpoints in our application needs.

Some examples for JAX-WS handlers are to handle custom authentication, Caching, Versioning and so on.Anything that has to do with the SOAP message can be done using the Händler framework.