SOAP:

1) SOAP stands for Simple Object Access Protocol. It is a specification from W3C the World Wide Web Consortium.The current version of SOAP is 1.2. A specification usually is a set of rules in case of soap.

2) These rules come in form of a XML document . W3C defines all these elements that we can use to send out Web services requests and receive the responses back.

3) The soap envelope is the root element in the soap namespace.SOAP header one of its child element is used to send Meta information.The body is where the entire payload or the webservices request will go in.And even the response payload that comes back from the webservice provider comes back in this body.

4) For example, let's say we are developing a railway ticket reservation system and we are allowing our customers to make a credit card payment to purchase their tickets.Now our application needs to integrate it the bank to process this payment banks payment gateway, a bank Exposes out, let's assume that the bank Exposes out a web service which will accept credit card information from our application and written back a response of success or not.

5) This is how the soap request will look like the soap body will have all the credit card information which our application will send to the bank a payment gateway and we'll get a response back which will have the success or failure.In case that credit card expires or some other fault or exception occurs

6) We can use the Soap fault element which is an optional element.which is the child element of the soap body and we can send the error information back to the user or the application that is consuming the webservice. The soap fault has multiple child elements,but here are a couple of important ones.

7) The soap code which tells the error was on the client side or on the server side.There are multiple soap codes you can look up.The reason tells exactly what the problem was, in this case showing that the card has expired.

8) When we throw exception, As a webservice  provider,when we throw exception either it's in Java or dotnet those are exceptions by default will be converted into soap fault and sent back to the client by webservices stacks like Apache CXF, web logic, websphere. The last important element is the soap header.

9) The soap header is not used to send the payload information or the request and response but it is usually used to send meta formation and it is used by all the Web services standards or most of the webservices standards.

10) For example, here you see the security header which allows us to pass the username and password in a standard fashion.This is a part of the username token profile standard which is webservice standard, without this standard or without this header We don't know where to put this username and password. Lets say we are integrating it with a 

11) Dotnet application if we didnt have this standard the dotnet application doesn't know whether it should put the username or token in the header or what names it should use etc.Now with these Meta information, we can simply focus on developing our business logic and out of box will get the implementation for all these standards.

12) When I talk about webservice standards in later lectures, you will see all these in action.To summarize,Soap is a specification from W3C which provides us all xml elements that can be used to send requests and receive responses for Soap based web services. 

13) The main elements are the soap envelope, the soap body which is the child element of soap envelope and the soap header which can be used exchange meta information and the soap fault which which should be used to exchange fault information especially when something wrong happens on the provider and the exception response should be sent back to the client.